# CHAPTER I {#chapter-1}

::: {.pblock .center .double-space-after}
ORGANIZING CHAOS
:::

[The]{.small-caps} conscious and intelligent manipulation of the
organized habits and opinions of the masses is an important element in
democratic society. Those who manipulate this unseen mechanism of
society constitute an invisible government which is the true ruling
power of our country.

We are governed, our minds are molded, our tastes formed, our ideas
suggested, largely by men we have never heard of. This is a logical
result of the way in which our democratic society is organized. Vast
numbers of human beings must coöperate in this manner if they are to
live together as a smoothly functioning society.

Our invisible governors are, in many cases, unaware of the identity of
their fellow members in the inner cabinet.

They govern us by their qualities of natural leadership, their ability
to supply needed ideas and by their key position in the social
structure. Whatever attitude one chooses to take toward this condition,
it remains a fact that in almost every act of our daily lives, whether
in the sphere of politics or business, in our social conduct or our
ethical thinking, we are dominated by the relatively small number of
persons—a trifling fraction of our hundred and twenty million—who
understand the mental processes and social patterns of the masses. It is
they who pull the wires which control the public mind, who harness old
social forces and contrive new ways to bind and guide the world.

It is not usually realized how necessary these invisible governors are
to the orderly functioning of our group life. In theory, every citizen
may vote for whom he pleases. Our Constitution does not envisage
political parties as part of the mechanism of government, and its
framers seem not to have pictured to themselves the existence in our
national politics of anything like the modern political machine. But the
American voters soon found that without organization and direction their
individual votes, cast, perhaps, for dozens or hundreds of candidates,
would produce nothing but confusion. Invisible government, in the shape
of rudimentary political parties, arose almost overnight. Ever since
then we have agreed, for the sake of simplicity and practicality, that
party machines should narrow down the field of choice to two candidates,
or at most three or four.

In theory, every citizen makes up his mind on public questions and
matters of private conduct. In practice, if all men had to study for
themselves the abstruse economic, political, and ethical data involved
in every question, they would find it impossible to come to a conclusion
about anything. We have voluntarily agreed to let an invisible
government sift the data and high-spot the outstanding issues so that
our field of choice shall be narrowed to practical proportions. From our
leaders and the media they use to reach the public, we accept the
evidence and the demarcation of issues bearing upon public questions;
from some ethical teacher, be it a minister, a favorite essayist, or
merely prevailing opinion, we accept a standardized code of social
conduct to which we conform most of the time.

In theory, everybody buys the best and cheapest commodities offered him
on the market. In practice, if every one went around pricing, and
chemically testing before purchasing, the dozens of soaps or fabrics or
brands of bread which are for sale, economic life would become
hopelessly jammed. To avoid such confusion, society consents to have its
choice narrowed to ideas and objects brought to its attention through
propaganda of all kinds. There is consequently a vast and continuous
effort going on to capture our minds in the interest of some policy or
commodity or idea.

It might be better to have, instead of propaganda and special pleading,
committees of wise men who would choose our rulers, dictate our conduct,
private and public, and decide upon the best types of clothes for us to
wear and the best kinds of food for us to eat. But we have chosen the
opposite method, that of open competition. We must find a way to make
free competition function with reasonable smoothness. To achieve this
society has consented to permit free competition to be organized by
leadership and propaganda.

Some of the phenomena of this process are criticized—the manipulation of
news, the inflation of personality, and the general ballyhoo by which
politicians and commercial products and social ideas are brought to the
consciousness of the masses. The instruments by which public opinion is
organized and focused may be misused. But such organization and focusing
are necessary to orderly life.

As civilization has become more complex, and as the need for invisible
government has been increasingly demonstrated, the technical means have
been invented and developed by which opinion may be regimented.

With the printing press and the newspaper, the railroad, the telephone,
telegraph, radio and airplanes, ideas can be spread rapidly and even
instantaneously over the whole of America.

H. G. Wells senses the vast potentialities of these inventions when he
writes in the New York _Times_:

"Modern means of communication—the power afforded by print, telephone,
wireless and so forth, of rapidly putting through directive strategic or
technical conceptions to a great number of coöperating centers, of
getting quick replies and effective discussion—have opened up a new
world of political processes. Ideas and phrases can now be given an
effectiveness greater than the effectiveness of any personality and
stronger than any sectional interest. The common design can be
documented and sustained against perversion and betrayal. It can be
elaborated and developed steadily and widely without personal, local and
sectional misunderstanding."

What Mr. Wells says of political processes is equally true of commercial
and social processes and all manifestations of mass activity. The
groupings and affiliations of society to-day are no longer subject to
"local and sectional" limitations. When the Constitution was adopted,
the unit of organization was the village community, which produced the
greater part of its own necessary commodities and generated its group
ideas and opinions by personal contact and discussion directly among its
citizens. But to-day, because ideas can be instantaneously transmitted
to any distance and to any number of people, this geographical
integration has been supplemented by many other kinds of grouping, so
that persons having the same ideas and interests may be associated and
regimented for common action even though they live thousands of miles
apart.

It is extremely difficult to realize how many and diverse are these
cleavages in our society. They may be social, political, economic,
racial, religious or ethical, with hundreds of subdivisions of each. In
the World Almanac, for example, the following groups are listed under
the A's:

The League to Abolish Capital Punishment; Association to Abolish War;
American Institute of Accountants; Actors' Equity Association; Actuarial
Association of America; International Advertising Association; National
Aeronautic Association; Albany Institute of History and Art; Amen
Corner; American Academy in Rome; American Antiquarian Society; League
for American Citizenship; American Federation of Labor; Amorc
(Rosicrucian Order); Andiron Club; American-Irish Historical
Association; Anti-Cigarette League; Anti-Profanity League; Archeological
Association of America; National Archery Association; Arion Singing
Society; American Astronomical Association; Ayrshire Breeders'
Association; Aztec Club of 1847. There are many more under the "A"
section of this very limited list.

The American Newspaper Annual and Directory for 1928 lists 22,128
periodical publications in America. I have selected at random the N's
published in Chicago. They are:

Narod (Bohemian daily newspaper); Narod-Polski (Polish monthly);
N.A.R.D. (pharmaceutical); National Corporation Reporter; National
Culinary Progress (for hotel chefs); National Dog Journal; National Drug
Clerk; National Engineer; National Grocer; National Hotel Reporter;
National Income Tax Magazine; National Jeweler; National Journal of
Chiropractic; National Live Stock Producer; National Miller; National
Nut News; National Poultry, Butter and Egg Bulletin; National
Provisioner (for meat packers); National Real Estate Journal; National
Retail Clothier; National Retail Lumber Dealer; National Safety News;
National Spiritualist; National Underwriter; The Nation's Health;
Naujienos (Lithuanian daily newspaper); New Comer (Republican weekly for
Italians); Daily News; The New World (Catholic weekly); North American
Banker; North American Veterinarian.

The circulation of some of these publications is astonishing. The
National Live Stock Producer has a sworn circulation of 155,978; The
National Engineer, of 20,328; The New World, an estimated circulation of
67,000. The greater number of the periodicals listed—chosen at random
from among 22,128—have a circulation in excess of 10,000.

The diversity of these publications is evident at a glance. Yet they can
only faintly suggest the multitude of cleavages which exist in our
society, and along which flow information and opinion carrying authority
to the individual groups.

Here are the conventions scheduled for Cleveland, Ohio, recorded in a
single recent issue of "World Convention Dates"—a fraction of the 5,500
conventions and rallies scheduled.

The Employing Photo-Engravers' Association of America; The Outdoor
Writers' Association; the Knights of St. John; the Walther League; The
National Knitted Outerwear Association; The Knights of St. Joseph; The
Royal Order of Sphinx; The Mortgage Bankers' Association; The
International Association of Public Employment Officials; The Kiwanis
Clubs of Ohio; The American Photo-Engravers' Association; The Cleveland
Auto Manufacturers Show; The American Society of Heating and Ventilating
Engineers.

Other conventions to be held in 1928 were those of:

The Association of Limb Manufacturers' Associations; The National Circus
Fans' Association of America; The American Naturopathic Association; The
American Trap Shooting Association; The Texas Folklore Association; The
Hotel Greeters; The Fox Breeders' Association; The Insecticide and
Disinfectant Association; The National Association of Egg Case and Egg
Case Filler Manufacturers; The American Bottlers of Carbonated
Beverages; and The National Pickle Packers' Association, not to mention
the Terrapin Derby—most of them with banquets and orations attached.

If all these thousands of formal organizations and institutions could be
listed (and no complete list has ever been made), they would still
represent but a part of those existing less formally but leading
vigorous lives. Ideas are sifted and opinions stereotyped in the
neighborhood bridge club. Leaders assert their authority through
community drives and amateur theatricals. Thousands of women may
unconsciously belong to a sorority which follows the fashions set by a
single society leader.

"Life" satirically expresses this idea in the reply which it represents
an American as giving to the Britisher who praises this country for
having no upper and lower classes or castes:

"Yeah, all we have is the Four Hundred, the White-Collar Men,
Bootleggers, Wall Street Barons, Criminals, the D.A.R., the K.K.K., the
Colonial Dames, the Masons, Kiwanis and Rotarians, the K. of C., the
Elks, the Censors, the Cognoscenti, the Morons, Heroes like Lindy, the
W.C.T.U., Politicians, Menckenites, the Booboisie, Immigrants,
Broadcasters, and—the Rich and Poor."

Yet it must be remembered that these thousands of groups interlace. John
Jones, besides being a Rotarian, is member of a church, of a fraternal
order, of a political party, of a charitable organization, of a
professional association, of a local chamber of commerce, of a league
for or against prohibition or of a society for or against lowering the
tariff, and of a golf club. The opinions which he receives as a
Rotarian, he will tend to disseminate in the other groups in which he
may have influence.

This invisible, intertwining structure of groupings and associations is
the mechanism by which democracy has organized its group mind and
simplified its mass thinking. To deplore the existence of such a
mechanism is to ask for a society such as never was and never will be.
To admit that it exists, but expect that it shall not be used, is
unreasonable.

Emil Ludwig represents Napoleon as "ever on the watch for indications of
public opinion; always listening to the voice of the people, a voice
which defies calculation. 'Do you know,' he said in those days, 'what
amazes me more than all else? The impotence of force to organize
anything.'"

It is the purpose of this book to explain the structure of the mechanism
which controls the public mind, and to tell how it is manipulated by the
special pleader who seeks to create public acceptance for a particular
idea or commodity. It will attempt at the same time to find the due
place in the modern democratic scheme for this new propaganda and to
suggest its gradually evolving code of ethics and practice.

