# CHAPTER II {#chapter-2}

::: {.pblock .center .double-space-after}
THE NEW PROPAGANDA
:::

[In]{.small-caps} the days when kings were kings, Louis XIV made his
modest remark, "L'Etat c'est moi." He was nearly right.

But times have changed. The steam engine, the multiple press, and the
public school, that trio of the industrial revolution, have taken the
power away from kings and given it to the people. The people actually
gained power which the king lost. For economic power tends to draw after
it political power; and the history of the industrial revolution shows
how that power passed from the king and the aristocracy to the
bourgeoisie. Universal suffrage and universal schooling reÃ«nforced this
tendency, and at last even the bourgeoisie stood in fear of the common
people. For the masses promised to become king.

To-day, however, a reaction has set in. The minority has discovered a
powerful help in influencing majorities. It has been found possible so
to mold the mind of the masses that they will throw their newly gained
strength in the desired direction. In the present structure of society,
this practice is inevitable. Whatever of social importance is done
to-day, whether in politics, finance, manufacture, agriculture, charity,
education, or other fields, must be done with the help of propaganda.
Propaganda is the executive arm of the invisible government.

Universal literacy was supposed to educate the common man to control his
environment. Once he could read and write he would have a mind fit to
rule.  So ran the democratic doctrine. But instead of a mind, universal
literacy has given him rubber stamps, rubber stamps inked with
advertising slogans, with editorials, with published scientific data,
with the trivialities of the tabloids and the platitudes of history, but
quite innocent of original thought. Each man's rubber stamps are the
duplicates of millions of others, so that when those millions are
exposed to the same stimuli, all receive identical imprints, It may seem
an exaggeration to say that the American public gets most of its ideas
in this wholesale fashion. The mechanism by which ideas are disseminated
on a large scale is propaganda, in the broad sense of an organized
effort to spread a particular belief or doctrine.

I am aware that the word "propaganda" carries to many minds an
unpleasant connotation. Yet whether, in any instance, propaganda is good
or bad depends upon the merit of the cause urged, and the correctness of
the information published.

In itself, the word "propaganda" has certain technical meanings which,
like most things in this world, are "neither good nor bad but custom
makes them so." I find the word defined in Funk and Wagnalls' Dictionary
in four ways:

"1. A society of cardinals, the overseers of foreign missions; also the
College of the Propaganda at Rome founded by Pope Urban VIII in 1627 for
the education of missionary priests; Sacred College _de Propaganda
Fide_.

"2. Hence, any institution or scheme for propagating a doctrine or
system.

"3. Effort directed systematically toward the gaining of public support
for an opinion or a course of action.

"4. The principles advanced by a propaganda."

The _Scientific American_, in a recent issue, pleads for the restoration
to respectable usage of that "fine old word 'propaganda.'"

"There is no word in the English language," it says, "whose meaning has
been so sadly distorted as the word 'propaganda.' The change took place
mainly during the late war when the term took on a decidedly sinister
complexion.

"If you turn to the Standard Dictionary, you will find that the word was
applied to a congregation or society of cardinals for the care and
oversight of foreign missions which was instituted at Rome in the year
1627\. It was applied also to the College of the Propaganda at Rome that
was founded by Pope Urban VIII, for the education of the missionary
priests. Hence, in later years the word came to be applied to any
institution or scheme for propagating a doctrine or system.

"Judged by this definition, we can see that in its true sense propaganda
is a perfectly legitimate form of human activity. Any society, whether
it be social, religious or political, which is possessed of certain
beliefs, and sets out to make them known, either by the spoken or
written words, is practicing propaganda.

"Truth is mighty and must prevail, and if any body of men believe that
they have discovered a valuable truth, it is not merely their privilege
but their duty to disseminate that truth. If they realize, as they
quickly must, that this spreading of the truth can be done upon a large
scale and effectively only by organized effort, they will make use of
the press and the platform as the best means to give it wide
circulation. Propaganda becomes vicious and reprehensive only when its
authors consciously and deliberately disseminate what they know to be
lies, or when they aim at effects which they know to be prejudicial to
the common good.

"'Propaganda' in its proper meaning is a perfectly wholesome word, of
honest parentage, and with an honorable history. The fact that it should
to-day be carrying a sinister meaning merely shows how much of the child
remains in the average adult. A group of citizens writes and talks in
favor of a certain course of action in some debatable question,
believing that it is promoting the best interest of the community.
Propaganda? Not a bit of it. Just a plain forceful statement of truth.
But let another group of citizens express opposing views, and they are
promptly labeled with the sinister name of
propaganda.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.

"'What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander,' says a wise old
proverb. Let us make haste to put this fine old word back where it
belongs, and restore, its dignified significance for the use of our
children and our children's children."
The extent to which propaganda shapes the progress of affairs about
us.may surprise even well informed persons. Nevertheless, it is only
necessary to look under the surface of the newspaper for a hint as to
propaganda's authority over public opinion. Page one of the New York
_Times_ on the day these paragraphs are written contains eight important
news stories. Four of them, or one-half, are propaganda. The casual
reader accepts them as accounts of spontaneous happenings. But are they?
Here are the headlines which announce them: "[TWELVE NATIONS WARN CHINA
REAL REFORM MUST COME BEFORE THEY GIVE RELIEF]{.small}," "[PRITCHETT
REPORTS ZIONISM WILL FAIL]{.small}," "[REALTY MEN DEMAND A TRANSIT
INQUIRY]{.small}," and "[OUR LIVING STANDARD HIGHEST IN HISTORY, SAYS
HOOVER REPORT]{.small}."

Take them in order: the article on China explains the joint report of
the Commission on Extraterritoriality in China, presenting an exposition
of the Powers' stand in the Chinese muddle. What it says is less
important than what it is. It was "made public by the State Department
to-day" with the purpose of presenting to the American public a picture
of the State Department's position. Its source gives it authority, and
the American public tends to accept and support the State Department
view.

The report of Dr. Pritchett, a trustee of the Carnegie Foundation for
International Peace, is an attempt to find the facts about this Jewish
colony in the midst of a restless Arab world. When Dr. Pritchett's
survey convinced him that in the long run Zionism would "bring more
bitterness and more unhappiness both for the Jew and for the Arab," this
point of view was broadcast with all the authority of the Carnegie
Foundation, so that the public would hear and believe. The statement by
the president of the Real Estate Board of New York, and Secretary
Hoover's report, are similar attempts to influence the public toward an
opinion.

These examples are not given to create the impression that there is
anything sinister about propaganda. They are set down rather to
illustrate how conscious direction is given to events, and how the men
behind these events influence public opinion. As such they are examples
of modern propaganda. At this point we may attempt to define propaganda.

Modern propaganda is a consistent, enduring effort to create or shape
events to influence the relations of the public to an enterprise, idea
or group.

This practice of creating circumstances and of creating pictures in the
minds of millions of persons is very common. Virtually no important
undertaking is now carried on without it, whether that enterprise be
building a cathedral, endowing a university, marketing a moving picture,
floating a large bond issue, or electing a president. Sometimes the
effect on the public is created by a professional propagandist,
sometimes by an amateur deputed for the job. The important thing is that
it is universal and continuous; and in its sum total it is regimenting
the public mind every bit as much as an army regiments the bodies of its
soldiers.

So vast are the numbers of minds which can be regimented, and so
tenacious are they when regimented, that a group at times offers an
irresistible pressure before which legislators, editors, and teachers
are helpless. The group will cling to its stereotype, as Walter Lippmann
calls it, making of those supposedly powerful beings, the leaders of
public opinion, mere bits of driftwood in the surf. When an Imperial
Wizard, sensing what is perhaps hunger for an ideal, offers a picture of
a nation all Nordic and nationalistic, the common man of the older
American stock, feeling himself elbowed out of his rightful position and
prosperity by the newer immigrant stocks, grasps the picture which fits
in so neatly with his prejudices, and makes it his own. He buys the
sheet and pillow-case costume, and bands with his fellows by the
thousand into a huge group powerful enough to swing state elections and
to throw a ponderous monkey wrench into a national convention.

In our present social organization approval of the public is essential
to any large undertaking. Hence a laudable movement may be lost unless
it impresses itself on the public mind. Charity, as well as business,
and politics and literature, for that matter, have had to adopt
propaganda, for the public must be regimented into giving money just as
it must be regimented into tuberculosis prophylaxis. The Near East
Relief, the Association for the Improvement of the Condition of the Poor
of New York, and all the rest, have to work on public opinion just as
though they had tubes of tooth paste to sell. We are proud of our
diminishing infant death rateâand that too is the work of propaganda.

Propaganda does exist on all sides of us, and it does change our mental
pictures of the world. Even if this be unduly pessimisticâand that
remains to be provedâthe opinion reflects a tendency that is undoubtedly
real. In fact, its use is growing as its efficiency in gaining public
support is recognized.

This then, evidently indicates the fact that any one with sufficient
influence can lead sections of the public at least for a time and for a
given purpose. Formerly the rulers were the leaders. They laid out the
course of history, by the simple process of doing what they wanted. And
if nowadays the successors of the rulers, those whose position or ability gives them power, can no longer do what they want without the
approval of the masses, they find in propaganda a tool which is
increasingly powerful in gaining that approval. Therefore, propaganda is
here to stay.

It was, of course, the astounding success of propaganda during the war
that opened the eyes of the intelligent few in all departments of life
to the possibilities of regimenting the public mind. The American
government and numerous patriotic agencies developed a technique which,
to most persons accustomed to bidding for public acceptance, was new.
They not only appealed to the individual by means of every
approachâvisual, graphic, and auditoryâto support the national endeavor,
but they also secured the coÃ¶peration of the key men in every
groupâpersons whose mere word carried authority to hundreds or thousands
or hundreds of thousands of followers. They thus automatically gained
the support of fraternal, religious, commercial, patriotic, social and
local groups whose members took their opinions from their accustomed
leaders and spokesmen, or from the periodical publications which they
were accustomed to read and believe. At the same time, the manipulators
of patriotic opinion made use of the mental clichÃ©s and the emotional
habits of the public to produce mass reactions against the alleged
atrocities, the terror and the tyranny of the enemy. It was only
natural, after the war ended, that intelligent persons should ask
themselves whether it was not possible to apply a similar technique to
the problems of peace.

As a matter of fact, the practice of propaganda since the war has
assumed very different forms from those prevalent twenty years ago. This
new technique may fairly be called the new propaganda.

It takes account not merely of the individual, nor even of the mass mind
alone, but also and especially of the anatomy of society, with its
interlocking group formations and loyalties. It sees the individual not
only as a cell in the social organism but as a cell organized into the
social unit. Touch a nerve at a sensitive spot and you get an automatic
response from certain specific members of the organism.

Business offers graphic examples of the effect that may be produced upon
the public by interested groups, such as textile manufacturers losing
their markets. This problem arose, not long ago, when the velvet
manufacturers were facing ruin because their product had long been out
of fashion. Analysis showed that it was impossible to revive a velvet
fashion within America. Anatomical hunt for the vital spot! Paris!
Obviously! But yes and no. Paris is the home of fashion. Lyons is the
home of silk. The attack had to be made at the source. It was determined
to substitute purpose for chance and to utilize the regular sources for
fashion distribution and to influence the public from these sources. A
velvet fashion service, openly supported by the manufacturers, was
organized. Its first function was to establish contact with the Lyons
manufactories and the Paris couturiers to discover what they were doing,
to encourage them to act on behalf of velvet, and to help in the proper
exploitation of their wares. An intelligent Parisian was enlisted in the
work. He visited Lanvin and Worth, AgnÃ¨s and Patou, and others and
induced them to use velvet in their gowns and hats. It was he who
arranged for the distinguished Countess This or Duchess That to wear the
hat or the gown. And as for the presentation of the idea to the public,
the American buyer or the American woman of fashion was simply shown the
velvet creations in the atelier of the dressmaker or the milliner. She
bought the velvet because she liked it and because it was in fashion.

The editors of the American magazines and fashion reporters of the
American newspapers, like- wise subjected to the actual (although
created) circumstance, reflected it in their news, which, in turn,
subjected the buyer and the consumer here to the same influences. The
result was that what was at first trickle of velvet became a flood. A
demand was slowly, but deliberately, created in Paris and America. A big
department store, aiming to be a style leader, advertised velvet gowns
and hats on the authority of the French couturiers, and quoted original
cables received from them. The echo of the new style note was heard from
hundreds of department stores throughout the country which wanted to be
style leaders too. Bulletins followed despatches. The mail followed the
cables. And the American woman traveler appeared before the ship news
photographers in velvet gown and hat.

The created circumstances had their effect. "Fickle fashion has veered
to velvet," was one newspaper comment. And the industry in the United
States again kept thousands busy.

The new propaganda, having regard to the constitution of society as a
whole, not infrequently serves to focus and realize the desires of the
masses. A desire for a specific reform, however widespread, cannot be
translated into action until it is made articulate, and until it has
exerted sufficient pressure upon the proper law-making bodies. Millions
of house- wives may feel that manufactured foods deleterious to health
should be prohibited. But there is little chance that their individual
desires will be translated into effective legal form unless their
half-expressed demand can be organized, made vocal, and concentrated
upon the state legislature or upon the Federal Congress in some mode
which will produce the results they desire. Whether they realize it or
not, they call upon propaganda to organize and effectuate their demand.

But clearly it is the intelligent minorities which need to make use of
propaganda continuously and systematically. In the active proselytizing
minorities in whom selfish interests and public interests coincide lie
the progress and development of America. Only through the active energy
of the intelligent few can the public at large become aware of and act
upon new ideas.

Small groups of persons can, and do, make the rest of us think what they
please about a given subject. But there are usually proponents and
opponents of every propaganda, both of whom are equally eager to
convince the majority.
