# CHAPTER IV {#chapter-4}

::: {.pblock .center .double-space-after}
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF PUBLIC RELATIONS
:::

[The]{.small-caps} systematic study of mass psychology revealed to
students the potentialities of invisible government of society by
manipulation of the motives which actuate man in the group. Trotter and
Le Bon, who approached the subject in a scientific manner, and Graham
Wallas, Walter Lippmann and others who continued with searching studies
of the group mind, established that the group has mental characteristics
distinct from those of the individual, and is motivated by impulses and
emotions which cannot be explained on the basis of what we know of
individual psychology. So the question naturally arose: If we understand
the mechanism and motives of the group mind, is it not possible to
control and regiment the masses according to our will without their
knowing it?

The recent practice of propaganda has proved that it is possible, at
least up to a certain point and within certain limits. Mass psychology
is as yet far from being an exact science and the mysteries of human
motivation are by no means all revealed. But at least theory and
practice have combined with sufficient success to permit us to know that
in certain cases we can effect some change in public opinion with a fair
degree of accuracy by operating a certain mechanism, just as the
motorist can regulate the speed of his car by manipulating the flow of
gasoline. Propaganda is not a science in the laboratory sense, but it is
no longer entirely the empirical affair that it was before the advent of
the study of mass psychology. It is now scientific in the sense that it
seeks to base its operations upon definite knowledge drawn from direct
observation of the group mind, and upon the application of principles
which have been demonstrated to be consistent and relatively constant.

The modern propagandist studies systematically and objectively the
material with which he is working in the spirit of the laboratory. If
the matter in hand is a nation-wide sales campaign, he studies the field
by means of a clipping service, or of a corps of scouts, or by personal
study at a crucial spot. He determines, for example, which features of a
product are losing their public appeal, and in what new direction the
public taste is veering. He will not fail to investigate to what extent
it is the wife who has the final word in the choice of her husband's
car, or of his suits and shirts.

Scientific accuracy of results is not to be expected, because many of
the elements of the situation must always be beyond his control. He may
know with a fair degree of certainty that under favorable circumstances
an international flight will produce a spirit of good will; making
possible even the consummation of political programs. But he cannot be
sure that some unexpected event will not overshadow this flight in the
public interest, or that some other aviator may not do something more
spectacular the day before. Even in his restricted field of public
psychology there must always be a wide margin of error. Propaganda, like
economics and sociology, can never be an exact science for the reason
that its subject-matter, like theirs, deals with human beings.

If you can influence the leaders, either with or without their conscious
coöperation, you automatically influence the group which they sway. But
men do not need to be actually gathered together in a public meeting or
in a street riot, to be subject to the influences of mass psychology.
Because man is by nature gregarious he feels himself to be member of a
herd, even when he is alone in his room with the curtains drawn. His
mind retains the patterns which have been stamped on it by the group
influences.

A man sits in his office deciding what stocks to buy. He imagines, no
doubt, that he is planning his purchases according to his own judgment.
In actual fact his judgment is a mélange of impressions stamped on his
mind by outside influences which unconsciously control his thought. He
buys a certain railroad stock because it was in the headlines yesterday
and hence is the one which comes most prominently to his mind; because
he has a pleasant recollection of a good dinner on one of its fast
trains; because it has a liberal labor policy, a reputation for honesty;
because he has been told that J. P. Morgan owns some of its shares.

Trotter and Le Bon concluded that the group mind does not _think_ in the
strict sense of the word. In place of thoughts it has impulses, habits
and emotions. In making up its mind its first impulse is usually to
follow the example of a trusted leader. This is one of the most firmly
established principles of mass psychology. It operates in establishing
the rising or diminishing prestige of a summer resort, in causing a run
on a bank, or a panic on the stock exchange, in creating a best seller,
or a box-office success.

But when the example of the leader is not at hand and the herd must
think for itself, it does so by means of clichés, pat words or images
which stand for a whole group of ideas or experiences. Not many years
ago, it was only necessary to tag a political candidate with the word
interests to stampede millions of people into voting against him,
because anything associated with "the interests" seemed necessarily
corrupt. Recently the word Bolshevik has performed a similar service for
persons who wished to frighten the public away from a line of action.

By playing upon an old cliché, or manipulating a new one, the
propagandist can sometimes swing a whole mass of group emotions. In
Great Britain, during the war, the evacuation hospitals came in for a
considerable amount of criticism because of the summary way in which
they handled their wounded. It was assumed by the public that a hospital
gives prolonged and conscientious attention to its patients. When the
name was changed to evacuation posts the critical reaction vanished. No
one expected more than an adequate emergency treatment from an
institution so named. The cliché hospital was indelibly associated in
the public mind with a certain picture. To persuade the public to
discriminate between one type of hospital and another, to dissociate the
cliché from the picture it evoked, would have been an impossible task.
Instead, a new cliché automatically conditioned the public emotion
toward these hospitals.

Men are rarely aware of the real reasons which motivate their actions. A
man may believe that he buys a motor car because, after careful study of
the technical features of all makes on the market, he has concluded that
this is the best. He is almost certainly fooling himself. He bought it,
perhaps, because a friend whose financial acumen he respects bought one
last week; or because his neighbors believed he was not able to afford a
car of that class; or because its colors are those of his college
fraternity.

It is chiefly the psychologists of the school of Freud who have pointed
out that many of man's thoughts and actions are compensatory substitutes
for desires which he has been obliged to suppress. A thing may be
desired not for its intrinsic worth or usefulness, but because he has
unconsciously come to see in it a symbol of something else, the desire
for which he is ashamed to admit to himself. A man buying a car may
think he wants it for purposes of locomotion, whereas the fact may be
that he would really prefer not to be burdened with it, and would rather
walk for the sake of his health. He may really want it because it is 2
symbol of social position, an evidence of his success in business, or a
means of pleasing his wife.

This general principle, that men are very largely actuated by motives
which they conceal from themselves, is as true of mass as of individual
psychology. It is evident that the successful propagandist must
understand the true motives and not be content to accept the reasons
which men give for what they do.

It is not sufficient to understand only the mechanical structure of
society, the groupings and cleavages and loyalties. An engineer may know
all about the cylinders and pistons of a locomotive, but unless he knows
how steam behaves under pressure he cannot make his engine run. Human
desires are the steam which makes the social machine work. Only by
understanding them can the propagandist control that vast, loose-jointed
mechanism which is modern society.

The old propagandist based his work on the mechanistic reaction
psychology then in vogue in our colleges. This assumed that the human
mind was merely an individual machine, a system of nerves and nerve
centers, reacting with mechanical regularity to stimuli, like a
helpless, will-less automaton. It was the special pleader's function to
provide the stimulus which would cause the desired reaction in the
individual purchaser.

It was one of the doctrines of the reaction psychology that a certain
stimulus often repeated would create a habit, or that the mere
reiteration of an idea would create a conviction. Suppose the old type
of salesmanship, acting for a meat packer, was seeking to increase the
sale of bacon. It would reiterate innumerable times in full-page
advertisements: "Eat more bacon. Eat bacon because it is cheap, because
it is good, because it gives you reserve energy."

The newer salesmanship, understanding the group structure of society and
the principles of mass psychology, would first ask: "Who is it that
influences the eating habits of the public?" The answer, obviously, is:
"The physicians." The new salesman will then suggest to physicians to
say publicly that it is wholesome to eat bacon. He knows as a
mathematical certainty, that large numbers of persons will follow the
advice of their doctors, because he understands the psychological
relation of dependence of men upon their physicians.

The old-fashioned propagandist, using almost exclusively the appeal of
the printed word, tried to persuade the individual reader to buy a
definite article, immediately. This approach is exemplified in a type of
advertisement which used to be considered ideal from the point of view
of directness and effectiveness:

"YOU (perhaps with a finger pointing at the reader) _buy O'Leary's
rubber heels_—NOW."

The advertiser sought by means of reiteration and emphasis directed upon
the individual, to break down or penetrate sales resistance. Although
the appeal was aimed at fifty million persons, it was aimed at each as
an individual.

The new salesmanship has found it possible, by dealing with men in the
mass through their group formations, to set up psychological and
emotional currents which will work for him. Instead of assaulting sales
resistance by direct attack, he is interested in removing sales
resistance. He creates circumstances which will swing emotional currents
so as to make for purchaser demand.

If, for instance, I want to sell pianos, it is not sufficient to blanket
the country with a direct appeal, such as:'

"YOU _buy a Mozart piano now. It is cheap. The best artists use it. It
will last for years._"

The claims may all be true, but they are in direct conflict with the
claims of other piano manufacturers, and in indirect competition with
the claims of a radio or a motor car, each competing for the consumer's
dollar.

What are the true reasons why the purchaser is planning to spend his
money on a new car instead of on a new piano? Because he has decided
that he wants the commodity called locomotion more than he wants the
commodity called music? Not altogether. He buys a car, because it is at
the moment the group custom to buy cars.

The modern propagandist therefore sets to work to create circumstances
which will modify that custom. He appeals perhaps to the home instinct
which is fundamental. He will endeavor to develop public acceptance of
the idea of a music room in the home. This he may do, for example, by
organizing an exhibition of period music rooms designed by well known
decorators who themselves exert an influence on the buying groups. He
enhances the effectiveness and prestige of these rooms by putting in
them rare and valuable tapestries. Then, in order to create dramatic
interest in the exhibit, he stages an event or ceremony. To this
ceremony key people, persons known to influence the buying habits of the
public, such as a famous violinist, a popular artist, and a society
leader, are invited. These key persons affect other groups, lifting the
idea of the music room to a place in the public consciousness which it
did not have before. The juxtaposition of these leaders, and the idea
which they are dramatizing, are then projected to the wider public
through various publicity channels. Meanwhile, influential architects
have been persuaded to make the music room an integral architectural
part of their plans with perhaps a specially charming niche in one
corner for the piano. Less influential architects will as a matter of
course imitate what is done by the men whom they consider masters of
their profession. They in turn will implant the idea of the music room
in the mind of the general public.

The music room will be accepted because it has been made the thing. And
the man or woman who has a music room, or has arranged a corner of the
parlor as a musical corner, will naturally think of buying a piano. It
will come to him as his own idea.

Under the old salesmanship the manufacturer said to the prospective
purchaser, "Please buy a piano." The new salesmanship has reversed the
process and caused the prospective purchaser to say to the manufacturer,
"Please sell me a piano."

The value of the associative processes in propaganda is shown in
connection with a large real estate development. To emphasize that
Jackson Heights was socially desirable every attempt was made to produce
this associative process. A benefit performance of the Jitney Players
was staged for the benefit of earthquake victims of Japan, under the
auspices of Mrs. Astor and others. The social advantages of the place
were projected—a golf course was laid out and a clubhouse planned. When
the post office was opened, the public relations counsel attempted to
use it as a focus for national interest and discovered that its opening
fell coincident with a date important in the annals of the American
Postal Service. This was then made the basis of the opening.

When an attempt was made to show the public the beauty of the
apartments, a competition was held among interior decorators for the
best furnished apartment in Jackson Heights. An important committee of
judges decided. This competition drew the approval of well known
authorities, as well as the interest of millions, who were made
cognizant of it through newspaper and magazine and other publicity, with
the effect of building up definitely the prestige of the development.

One of the most effective methods is the utilization of the group
formation of modern society in order to spread ideas. An example of this
is the nationwide competitions for sculpture in Ivory soap, open to
school children in certain age groups as well as professional sculptors.
A sculptor of national reputation found Ivory soap an excellent medium
for sculpture.

The Procter and Gamble Company offered a series of prizes for the best
sculpture in white soap. The contest was held under the auspices of the
Art Center in New York City, an organization of high standing in the art
world.

School superintendents and teachers throughout the country were glad to
encourage the movement as an educational aid for schools. Practice among
school children as part of their art courses was stimulated. Contests
were held between schools, between school districts and between cities.

Ivory soap was adaptable for sculpturing in the homes because mothers
saved the shavings and the imperfect efforts for laundry purposes. The
work itself was clean.

The best pieces are selected from the local competitions for entry in
the national contest. This is held annually at an important art gallery
in New York, whose prestige with that of the distinguished judges,
establishes the contest as a serious art event.

In the first of these national competitions about 500 pieces of
sculpture were entered. In the third, 2,500. And in the fourth, more
than 4,000. If the carefully selected pieces were so numerous, it is
evident that a vast number were sculptured during the year, and that a
much greater number must have been made for practice purposes. The good
will was greatly enhanced by the fact that this soap had become not
merely the concern of the housewife but also a matter of personal and
intimate interest to her children.

A number of familiar psychological motives were set in motion in the
carrying out of this campaign. The esthetic, the competitive, the
gregarious (much of the sculpturing was done in school groups), the
snobbish (the impulse to follow the example of a recognized leader), the
exhibitionist, and—last but by no means least—the maternal.

All these motives and group habits were put in concerted motion by the
simple machinery of group leadership and authority. As if actuated by
the pressure of a button, people began working for the client for the
sake of the gratification obtained in the sculpture work itself.

This point is most important in successful propaganda work. The leaders
who lend their authority to any propaganda campaign will do so only if
it can be made to touch their own interests. There must be a
disinterested aspect of the propagandist's activities. In other words,
it is one of the functions of the public relations counsel to discover
at what points his client's interests coincide with those of other
individuals or groups.

In the case of the soap sculpture competition, the distinguished artists
and educators who sponsored the idea were glad to lend their services
and their names because the competitions really promoted an interest
which they had at heart—the cultivation of the esthetic impulse among
the younger generation.

Such coincidence and overlapping of interests is as infinite as the
interlacing of group formations themselves. For example, a railway
wishes to develop its business. The counsel on public relations makes a
survey to discover at what points its interests coincide with those of
its prospective customers. The company then establishes relations with
chambers of commerce along its right of way and assists them in
developing their communities. It helps them to secure new plants and
industries for the town. It facilitates business through the
dissemination of technical information. It is not merely a case of
bestowing favors in the hope of receiving favors; these activities of
the railroad, besides creating good will, actually promote growth on its
right of way. The interests of the railroad and the communities through
which it passes mutually interact and feed one another.

In the same way, a bank institutes an investment service for the benefit
of its customers in order that the latter may have more money to deposit
with the bank. Or a jewelry concern develops an insurance department to
insure the jewels it sells, in order to make the purchaser feel greater
security in buying jewels. Or a baking company establishes an
information service suggesting recipes for bread to encourage new uses
for bread in the home.

The ideas of the new propaganda are predicated on sound psychology based
on enlightened self-interest.

I have tried, in these chapters, to explain the place of propaganda in
modern American life and something of the methods by which it
operates—to tell the why, the what, the who and the how of the invisible
government which dictates our thoughts, directs our feelings and
controls our actions. In the following chapters I shall try to show how
propaganda functions in specific departments of group activity, to
suggest some of the further ways in which it may operate.
