# CHAPTER VII {#chapter-7}

::: {.pblock .center .double-space-after}
WOMEN'S ACTIVITIES AND PROPAGANDA
:::

[Women]{.small-caps} in contemporary America have achieved a legal
equality with men. This does not mean that their activities are
identical with those of men. Women in the mass still have special
interests and activities in addition to their economic pursuits and
vocational interests.

Women's most obvious influence is exerted when they are organized and
armed with the weapon of propaganda. So organized and armed they have
made their influence felt on city councils, state legislatures, and
national congresses, upon executives, upon 'political campaigns and upon
public opinion generally, both local and national.

In politics, the American women to-day occupy a much more important
position, from the standpoint of their influence, in their organized
groups than from the standpoint of the leadership they have acquired in
actual political positions or in actual office holding. The professional
woman politician has had, up to the present, not much influence, nor do,
women generally regard her as being the most important element in
question. Ma Ferguson, after all, was simply a woman in the home, a
catspaw for a deposed husband; Nellie Ross, the former Governor of
Wyoming, is from all accounts hardly a leader of statesmanship or public
opinion.

If the suffrage campaign did nothing more, it showed the possibilities
of propaganda to achieve certain ends. This propaganda to-day is being
utilized by women to achieve their programs in Washington and in the
states. In Washington they are organized as the Legislative Committee of
Fourteen Women's Organizations, including the League of Women Voters,
the Young Women's Christian Association, the Woman's Christian
Temperance Union, the Federation of Women's Clubs, etc. These
organizations map out a legislative program and then use the modern
technique of propaganda to make this legislative program actually pass
into the law of the land. Their accomplishments in the field are
various. They can justifiably take the credit for much welfare
legislation. The eight-hour day for women is theirs. Undoubtedly
prohibition and its enforcement are theirs, if they can be considered an
accomplishment. So is the Shepard-Towner Bill which stipulates support
by the central government of maternity welfare in the state governments.
This bill would not have passed had it not been for the political
prescience and sagacity of women like Mrs. Vanderlip and Mrs. Mitchell.

The Federal measures endorsed at the first convention of the National
League of Women Voters typify social welfare activities of women's
organizations. These covered such broad interests as child welfare,
education, the home and high prices, women in gainful occupations,
public health and morals, independent citizenship for married women, and
others.

To propagandize these principles, the National League of Women Voters
has published all types of literature, such as bulletins, calendars,
election information, has held a correspondence course on government and
conducted demonstration classes and citizenship schools.

Possibly the effectiveness of women's organizations in American politics
to-day is due to two things: first, the training of a professional class
of executive secretaries or legislative secretaries during the suffrage
campaigns, where every device known to the propagandist had to be used
to regiment a recalcitrant majority; secondly, the routing over into
peacetime activities of the many prominent women who were in the
suffrage campaigns and who also devoted themselves to the important
drives and mass influence movements during the war. Such women as Mrs.
Frank Vanderlip, Alice Ames Winter, Mrs. Henry Moskowitz, Mrs. Florence
Kelley, Mrs. John Blair, Mrs. O. H. P. Belmont, Doris Stevens, Alice
Paul come to mind.

If I have seemed to concentrate on the accomplishments of women in
politics, it is because they afford a particularly striking example of
intelligent use of the new propaganda to secure attention and acceptance
of minority ideas. It is perhaps curiously appropriate that the latest
recruits to the political arena should recognize and make use of the
newest weapons of persuasion to offset any lack of experience with what
is somewhat euphemistically termed practical politics. As an example of
this new technique: Some years ago, the Consumers' Committee of Women,
fighting the "American valuation" tariff, rented an empty store on
Fifty-seventh Street in New York and set up an exhibit of merchandise
tagging each item with the current price and the price it would cost if
the tariff went through. Hundreds of visitors to this shop rallied to
the cause of the committee.

But there are also non-political fields in which women can make and have
made their influence felt for social ends, and in which they have
utilized the principle of group leadership in attaining the desired
objectives.

In the General Federation of Women's Clubs, there are 13,000 clubs.
Broadly classified, they include civic and city clubs, mothers' and
homemakers' clubs, cultural clubs devoted to art, music or literature,
business and professional women's clubs, and general women's clubs,
which may embrace either civic or community phases, or combine some of
the other activities listed.

The woman's club is generally effective on behalf of health education;
in furthering appreciation of the fine arts; in sponsoring legislation
that affects the welfare of women and children; in playground
development and park improvement; in raising standards of social or
political morality; in homemaking and home economics, education and the
like. In these fields, the woman's club concerns itself with efforts
that are not ordinarily covered by existing agencies, and often both
initiates and helps to further movements for the good of the community.

A club interested principally in homemaking and the practical arts can
sponsor a cooking school for young brides and others. An example of the
keen interest of women in this field of education is the cooking school
recently conducted by the New York Herald Tribune, which held its
classes in Carnegie 'Hall, seating almost 3,000 persons. For the several
days of the cooking school, the hall was filled to capacity, rivaling
the drawing power of a McCormack or a Paderewski, and refuting most
dramatically the idea that women in large cities are not interested int
housewifery.

A movement for the serving of milk in public schools, or the
establishment of a baby health station at the department of health will
be an effort close to the heart of a club devoted to the interest of
mothers and child welfare.

A music club can broaden its sphere and be of service to the community
by coöperating with the local radio station in arranging better musical
programs. Fighting bad music ¢an be as militant a campaign and marshal
as varied resources as any political battle.

An art club can be active in securing loan exhibitions for its city. It
can also arrange travelling exhibits of the art work of its members or
show the art work of schools or universities.

A literary club may step out of its charmed circle of lectures and
literary lions and take a definite part in the educational life of the
community. It can sponsor, for instance, a competition in the public
schools for the best essay on the history of the city, or on the life of
its most famous son.

Over and above the particular object for which the woman's club may have
been constituted, it commonly stands ready to initiate or help any
movement which has for its object a distinct public good in the
community. More important, it constitutes an organized channel through
which women can make themselves felt as a definite part of public
opinion.

Just as women supplement men in private life, so they will supplement
men in public life by concentrating their organized efforts on those
objects which men are likely to ignore. There is a tremendous field for
women as active protagonists of new ideas and new methods of political
and social housekeeping. When organized and conscious of their power to
influence their surroundings, women can use their newly acquired freedom
in a great many ways to mold the world into a better place to live in,

