# CHAPTER XI {#chapter-11}

::: {.pblock .center .double-space-after}
THE MECHANICS OF PROPAGANDA
:::

[The]{.small-caps} media by which special pleaders transmit their
messages to the public through propaganda include all the means by which
people to-day transmit their ideas to one another. There is no means of
human communication which may not also be a means of deliberate
propaganda, because propaganda is simply the establishing of reciprocal
understanding between an individual and a group. '

The important point to the propagandist is that the relative value of
the various instruments of propaganda, and their relation to the masses,
are constantly changing. If he is to get full reach for his message he
must take advantage of these shifts of value the instant they occur.
Fifty years ago, the public meeting was a propaganda instrument par
excellence. To-day it is difficult to get more than a handful of people
to attend a public meeting unless. extraordinary attractions are part of
the program. The automobile takes them away from home, the radio keeps
them in the home, the successive daily editions of the newspaper bring
information to them in office or subway, and also they are sick of the
ballyhoo of the rally.

Instead there are numerous other media of communication, some new,
others old but so transformed that they have become virtually new. The
news- paper, of course, remains always a primary medium for the
transmission of opinions and ideas—in other words, for propaganda.

It was not many years ago that newspaper editors resented what they
called "the use of the news columns for propaganda purposes." Some
editors would even kill a good story if they imagined its publication
might benefit any one. This point of view is now largely abandoned.
To-day the leading editorial offices take the view that the real
criterion governing the publication or non-publication of matter which
comes to the desk is its news value. The newspaper cannot assume, nor is
it its function to assume, the responsibility of guaranteeing that what
it publishes will not work out to somebody's interest. There is hardly a
single item in any daily paper, the publication of which does not, or
might not, profit or injure somebody. That is the nature of news. What
the newspaper does strive for is that the news which it publishes shall
be accurate, and (since it must select from the mass of news material
available) that it shall be of interest and importance to large groups
of its readers.

In its editorial columns the newspaper is a personality, commenting upon
things and events from its individual point of view. But in its news
columns the typical modern American newspaper attempts to reproduce,
with due regard to news interest, the outstanding events and opinions of
the day.

It does not ask whether a given item is propaganda or not. What is
important is that it be news. And in the selection of news the editor is
usually entirely independent. In the New York _Times_—to take an
outstanding example—news is printed because of its news value and for no
other reason. The _Times_ editors determine with complete independence
what is and what is not news. They brook no censorship. They are not
influenced by any external pressure nor swayed by any values of
expediency or opportunism. The conscientious editor on every newspaper
realizes that his obligation to the public is news. The fact of its
accomplishment makes it news.

If the public relations counsel can breathe the breath of life into an
idea and make it take its place among other ideas and events, it will
receive the public attention it merits. There can be no question of his
"contaminating news at its source." He creates some of the day's events,
which must compete in the editorial office with other events. Often the
events which he creates may be specially acceptable to a newspaper's
public and he may create them with that public in mind.

If important things of life to-day consist of transatlantic radiophone
talks arranged by commercial telephone companies; if they consist of
inventions that will be commercially advantageous to the men who market
them; if they consist of Henry Fords with epoch-making cars—then all
this is news. The so-called flow of propaganda into the newspaper
offices of the country may, simply at the editor's discretion, find its
way to the waste basket.

The source of the news offered to the editor should always be clearly
stated and the facts accurately presented.

The situation of the magazines at the present moment, from the
propagandist's point of view, is different from that of the daily
newspapers. The average magazine assumes no obligation, as the newspaper
does, to reflect the current news. It selects its material deliberately,
in accordance with a continuous policy. It is not, like the newspaper,
an organ of public opinion, but tends rather to become a propagandist
organ, propagandizing for a particular idea, whether it be good
housekeeping, or smart apparel, or beauty in home decoration, or
debunking public opinion, or general enlightenment or liberalism or
amusement. One magazine may aim to sell health; another, English
gardens; another, fashionable men's wear; another, Nietzschean
philosophy.

In all departments in which the various magazines specialize, the public
relations counsel may play an important part. For he may, because of his
client's interest, assist them to create the events which further their
propaganda. A bank, in order to emphasize the importance of its women's
department, may arrange to supply a leading women's magazine with a
series of articles and advice on investments written by the woman expert
in charge of this department. The women's magazine in turn will utilize
this new feature as a means of building additional prestige and
circulation.

The lecture, once a powerful means of influencing public opinion, has
changed its value. The lecture itself may be only a symbol, a ceremony;
its importance, for propaganda purposes, lies in the fact that it was
delivered. Professor So-and-So, expounding an epoch-making invention,
may speak to five hundred persons, or only fifty. His lecture, if it is
important, will be broadcast; reports of it will appear in the
newspapers; discussion will be stimulated. The real value of the
lecture, from the propaganda point of view, is in its repercussion to
the general public.

The radio is at present one of the most important tools of the
propagandist. Its future development is uncertain.

It may compete with the newspaper as an advertising medium. Its ability
to reach millions of persons simultaneously naturally appeals to the
advertiser. And since the average advertiser has a limited appropriation
for advertising, money spent on the radio will tend to be withdrawn from
the newspaper.

To what extent is the publisher alive to this new phenomenon? It is
bound to come close to American journalism and publishing. Newspapers
have recognized the advertising potentialities of the companies that
manufacture radio apparatus, and of radio stores, large and small; and
newspapers have accorded to the radio in their news and feature columns
an importance relative to the increasing attention given by the public
to radio. At the same time, certain newspapers have bought radio
stations and linked them up with their news and entertainment
distribution facilities, supplying these two features over the air to
the public.

It is possible that newspaper chains will sell schedules of advertising
space on the air and on paper. Newspaper chains will possibly contract
with advertisers for circulation on paper and over the air. There are,
at present, publishers who sell space in the air and in their columns,
but they regard the two as separate ventures.

Large groups, political, racial, sectarian, economic or professional,
are tending to control stations to propagandize their points of view. Or
is it conceivable that America may adopt the English licensing system
under which the listener, instead of the advertiser, pays?

Whether the present system is changed, the advertiser—and
propagandist—must necessarily adapt himself to it. Whether, in the
future, air space will be sold openly as such, or whether the message
will reach the public in the form of straight entertainment and news, or
as special programs for particular groups, the propagandist must be
prepared to meet the conditions and utilize them.

The American motion picture is the greatest unconscious carrier of
propaganda in the world to-day. It is a great distributor for ideas and
opinions.

The motion picture can standardize the ideas and habits of a nation.
Because pictures are made to meet market demands, they reflect,
emphasize and even exaggerate broad popular tendencies, rather than
stimulate new ideas and opinions. The motion picture avails itself only
of ideas and facts which are in vogue. As the newspaper seeks to purvey
news, it seeks to purvey entertainment.

Another instrument of propaganda is the personality. Has the device of
the exploited personality been pushed too far? President Coolidge
photographed on his vacation in full Indian regalia in company with
full-blooded chiefs, was the climax of a greatly over-reported vacation.
Obviously a public personality can be made absurd by misuse of the very
mechanism which helped create it.

Yet the vivid dramatization of personality will always remain one of the
functions of the public relations counsel. The public instinctively
demands a personality to typify a conspicuous corporation or enterprise.

There is a story that a great financier discharged a partner because he
had divorced his wife.

"But what," asked the partner, "have my private affairs to do with the
banking business?"

"If you are not capable of managing your own wife," was the reply, "the
people will certainly believe that you are not capable of managing their
money."

The propagandist must treat personality as he would treat any other
objective fact within his province.

A personality may create circumstances, as Lindbergh created good will
between the United States and Mexico. Events may create a personality,
as the Cuban War created the political figure of Roosevelt. It is often
difficult to say which creates the other. Once a public figure has
decided what ends he wishes to achieve, he must regard himself
objectively and present an outward picture of himself which is
consistent with his real character and his aims.

There are a multitude of other avenues of approach to the public mind,
some old, some new as television. No attempt will be made to discuss
each one separately. The school may disseminate information concerning
scientific facts. The fact that a commercial concern may eventually
profit from a widespread understanding of its activities because of this
does not condemn the dissemination of such information, provided that
the subject merits study on the part of the students. If a baking
corporation contributes pictures and charts to a school to show "how
bread is made, these propaganda activities, if they are accurate and
candid, are in no way reprehensible, provided the school authorities
accept or reject such offers carefully on their educational merits.

It may be that a new product will be announced to the public by means of
a motion picture of a parade taking place a thousand miles away. Or the
manufacturer of a new jitney airplane may personally appear and speak in
a million homes through radio and television. The man who would most
effectively transmit his message to the public must be alert to make use
of all the means of propaganda.

Undoubtedly the public is becoming aware of the methods which are being
used to mold its opinions and habits. If the public is better informed
about the processes of its own life, it will be so much the more
receptive to reasonable appeals to its own interests. No matter how
sophisticated, how cynical the public may become about publicity
methods, it must respond to the basic appeals, because it will always
need food, crave amusement, long for beauty, respond to leadership.

If the public becomes more intelligent in its commercial demands,
commercial firms will meet the new standards. If it becomes weary of the
old. methods used to persuade it to accept a given idea or commodity,
its leaders will present their appeals more intelligently.

Propaganda will never die out. Intelligent men must realize that
propaganda is the modern instrument by which they can fight for
productive ends and help to bring order out of chaos.

::: {.big-space-before .pblock .center}
THE END
:::

